An integrated study of the nature and interactions of living things and their environments. This course is an introduction to the processes of evolution and speciation, ecology and ecosystem processes, cellular biology and organismal physiology. The course is primarily for students without a strong background in high school biology or chemistry.
Study of the structure of the human body, to include muscles, bones, heart, brain, ear, eye, and other systems, as well as a short look at development of the fetus. Lab work entails dissection of the cat and study of the human skeleton.
Basic functioning of the organ systems of the human body, including the brain and nervous system; vision and hearing; heart and circulation; blood and immunity; respiration, digestion and metabolism; muscles; excretory, endocrine, and reproductive systems.
Emphasis on broad biological principles, as illustrated by plants, and the economic importance and role of plants in human ecology.
A university success course for biology majors new to California State University, Chico. Appropriate for all incoming freshmen and transfer students. The course explores academic and social opportunities in addition to resources available to promote successful completion of the student's educational goals.
Introduction to biological molecules, bioenergetics, cellular structure and function, elements of molecular biology and genetics, and mechanisms of macroevolution and systematics.
Introduction to evolutionary history and biological diversity, microbes and protists, invertebrates, vertebrates, and plants. Form and function of plants and animals. Ecological principles.
Introduction to plant and animal physiology and development. Laboratory consists of small group independent investigations of biological questions that include student-devised experiments; application of biological techniques, data anaylsis, and peer reviewed presentation of results.
Introduction to structure/function, metabolism, genetics, ecological interactions and pathogenic mechanisms of microorganisms. In addition, the roles of microorganisms in sanitation and in the food and biotechnology industries will be discussed.
Analysis of the evidence for evolution and the nature of the process. Darwinism, neo-Darwinism, sociobiology, conflicts and misconceptions regarding evolution, creationism, and evolution of the human body and mind are considered.
The inheritance, expression, and evolution of the genetic material in humans. Topics include genetic engineering, gene therapy, prenatal diagnosis, cancer, the human genome project, genetic influences on human behavior, such as homosexuality and mental illness, and the social and ethical consequences of the new technologies.
Basic biological principles, including the scientific method, reproduction, development, physiology, and anatomy. The biological basis of childhood diseases, immunity, nutrition, issues of health and well-being, and the relevance of biological information in social, political, and ethical decision making regarding children.
Critically examines scientific and humanistic world views and sensibilities, directly applying these approaches to contemporary social and personal problems.
Critically examines scientific and humanistic world views and sensibilities, directly applying these approaches to contemporary social and personal problems.
This course explores sex, gender, sexual expression, and mating behavior in humans and non-humans from an evolutionary biological perspective. Why does sex exist? Why do genders exist? What are the alternatives? Why is sex expression so variable in nature? What explains the diversity of courtship and mating behaviors? The course emphasizes lessons gleaned from applying the principles of scientific inquiry toward the study of these and related questions.
An examination of ecological principles and the impact of increasing population and technology upon the environment.
Plant and animal morphology, classification, and ecological relationships examined through field and laboratory study.
An evaluation of the most common major diseases that affect our society and the lifestyle choices that contributes to them. A major theme is that the risk of acquiring many diseases can be reduced through lifestyle changes.
Some taxonomic background is recommended. Interrelationships among living organisms, field observations of such phenomena. Application of quantitative and qualitative methods to the interpretation of ecological phenomena.
A detailed study of the principles of classical, molecular, and population/evolutionary genetics. Activities will include computer simulations of segregation, linkage, and population genetics, internet-based database searches for genetic diseases and cloned genes, and searches of the current genetic literature.
Advanced study of plant anatomy, morphology, physicology, ecology, and evolution.
Introduction to the biology of prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms, as well as viruses. Topics include cell structure, metabolism, genetics; ecological interactions; pathogenic mechanisms; and the roles of microorganisms in sanitation, food production, and biotechnology. The lab focuses on methods for growing and studying diverse microbes.
Students observe in a clinical hospital laboratory and in a private clinical laboratory.
The roles and interactions of viruses, bacteria, algae, protozoa, and fungi in the natural and human environment, stressing fundamental principles of ecology and evolution.
Physical, chemical, and biological factors influencing the ecology of inland waters.
A detailed study of the evolutionary process, including history, natural selection, population genetics, molecular evolution, speciation, coevolution, and macroevolution.
Detailed analysis of structure and related functions of cells with an emphasis on the molecular mechanisms of gene expression and gene regulation. Lectures and laboratory sessions focus on current theories and methodologies associated with cloning, nucleic acid analysis, gene expression, bioinformatics, and genomics.
Detailed study of cellular function with an emphasis on intracellular and intercellular communication. Topics include protein structure and function, properties of biological membranes, signal transduction, protein trafficking pathways, vesicular transport, cell cycle, apotopsis and cancer.
Study of bacterial structure and function, modes of metabolism, regulatory responses to environmental change and stress, and microbial aspects of nutrition and growth.
Functions in higher plants; water and soil relations, photosynthesis, respiration, enzyme action, and growth.
General features of vertebrate physiology. Function of muscular, nervous, respiratory, circulatory, excretory, and endocrine systems.
This course provides students with background and fundamental information necessary to pursue neuroscience at the graduate or professional level. Cellular and molecular mechanisms within mammalian central nervous system are emphasized.
The morphology, ecology, and physiology of insects. Economic entomology and medical entomology, and taxonomy.
Principles and theories of animal development, emphasizing the vertebrate.
Consideration of the basic problems in animal behavior, including orientation, social behavior, and the nature and organization of animal societies.
Explanation of the anatomical similarities and differences of selected vertebrates. The evolution and adaptive significance of various systems are considered.
Morphology, ecology, behavior, and systematics of California fishes, with an introduction to fisheries biology. 
The morphology, evolution, physiology, behavior, ecology, and taxonomy of amphibians and reptiles. California amphibians and reptiles are emphasized, including field studies of local species.
The morphology, evolution, ecology, physiology, taxonomy, and behavior of birds, including field studies of local species.
Study of evolution, anatomy, physiology, ecology, and behavior of mammals. California mammals will be emphasized in lab.
This lecture, lab, and field course exposes students to the evolution, ecology, morphology, classification, and identification of North American waterfowl. Additionally, this course has a strong hands-on wetland management component, as well as extensive exposure to the primary literature.
Comparative morphology of plant types, emphasizing evolution of structures and methods of reproduction.
Study of plant pathology encompassing parasitism and disease in plants, pathogen attack strategies, diseased plant physiology, plant defense mechanisms, environmental effects on disease and descriptions of diseases and treatments.
Principles of plant classification with field study of local flora, emphasizing the higher plants and their phylogenetic relationships.
The composition and distribution of plant communities, emphasizing the ecological, environmental, and evolutionary processes that affect them.