Introduction to the profession of Civil Engineering and the various sub-disciplines of Civil Engineering. Overview of the professional engineer licensing process. Overview of the CSU, Chico Civil Engineering curriculum and the disciplinary patterns in the curriculum. Discussion of the importance and purpose of both professional societies and graduate education.
This course introduces the fundamentals of creating and reading civil engineering drawings by referencing architectural plans, subdivision maps and site plans, in addition to utilizing computer-aided drafting software to produce basic plans. Applications of the computer software include drawing accuracy, layer managing standards, dimensioning standards, sheet layouts, data extraction and drawing management. Topics are reinforced by a drawing project that requires sketching and measuring of existing features to create a set of as-built drawings. Additional course topics related to descriptive geometry include orthographic projections, auxiliary views, perspective drawings, and graphical solutions to vector analysis.
Theory and practice in measurement and computation of distances, angles, and areas on the earth's surface. Error of combined measurements analysis. Use of scientific calculator required.
This course introduces civil engineering design standards, concepts, and procedures related to transportation engineering and construction management. Topics include the standards and design of horizontal curves, vertical curves, and earthwork related to transportation projects in addition to survey staking, state plane coordinates, geographic information systems, and global positioning systems related to project surveying. The laboratory portion of this course includes the application of 3-dimensional graphic modeling software requiring creativity in design, development of construction plans, and operation of modern surveying equipment, such as total stations and GPS systems.
Introduction to biological processes used in environmental engineering analysis and design with emphasis on sustainability. Ecosystem structure and function, population dynamics, biochemical reactions, photosynthesis, microbial ecology, growth and kinetics. Engineering applications in control of communicable disease, aerobic and anaerobic degradation of organic waste, water quality management, drinking water treatment, wastewater and solid waste treatment, biomass energy, phytotechnology, and bioremediation.
Use of the computer in a variety of applications from the fields of engineering. Topics include computer hardware, operating systems, the Internet, technical word processing, electronic spreadsheets, computer charting and drawing, computer programming, and ethics.
Force systems, moments, equilibrium, centroids, and moments of inertia.
Analysis of alternatives by basic engineering economic methods and applications of statistics including probability, sampling theory and data analysis, and tests of hypotheses.
Supplemental applications and explanations intended to facilitate student understanding of content from CIVL 302.
Strength and elastic properties of materials of construction; tension, compression, shear, and torsion stresses; deflection and deformation; stress analysis of beams and columns.
Methods and instruments used in the determination of the strength and elastic properties of materials of engineering. Experiments verifying the theoretical principles of CIVL 311.
Fundamentals of structural analysis for beams, trusses, and frames. Topics include loading (including seismic), influence lines, approximate analysis methods, deflection analysis, and statically indeterminate structures. Methods applicable to computer analysis are introduced.
Hydrostatics, principles of continuity, work-energy and momentum, viscous effects, dimensional analysis and similitude, flow in closed conduits, drag on objects.
Co-curricular activity associated with one or more student professional organizations. Examples include collegiate competitions, such as the concrete canoe and the steel bridge contests, and sevice projects.
Introduction to law as it relates to the practice of civil engineering. Operation of a successful civil engineering business. Writing various technical reports and specifications.
Soil properties, tests, and classification. Analysis of soil stresses, consolidation, shear strength, lateral pressures, and ground water movement. Related design consideration involving spread footings, piles, retaining walls, and slopes.
The analysis and design of reinforced concrete structures and elements by the strength design method. Laboratory includes experiments on concrete, concrete structural elements, and a design project.
Introduction to water quality, water supply, distribution, and drinking water treatment; wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal. Disease transmission; water quality parameters; physical, chemical, and biological processes in the treatment of water, wastewater, and biosolids.
Transportation systems and facility planning, design, construction, operations, and maintenance. Pavement design and traffic engineering fundamentals. Laboratory includes field studies, design exercises, and modeling/forecasting tasks.
Water resources engineering covers principles of hydraulics and hydrology relevant to civil engineering applications. Topics include open channel hydraulics, rainfall-runoff predictions, ground-water infiltration, water budget modeling, storm water routing, and urban storm water management.
History of engineering, professional registration, codes of ethics, management issues, diversity, outsourcing, intellectual property, international development and technology transfer, sustainable design. A substantial written project with oral presentation is required.
The application of soil mechanics principles to the design of foundations for buildings and earth structures. Integration of structural design and soil response.
Theory, analysis, and design of steel structural elements and systems using the Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) method. 
Theory and design procedures for timber structures and their connections to resist gravity and lateral loads. Basic element design by the Allowable Stress Design (ASD) and/or Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) methods are detailed. Also covered is design of floor and roof systems and shear walls.
Earthquake and wind hazard related to the structural design of buildings. Topics include engineering seismology, wind environment and climatology, structural dynamics, structural loading, and design methodologies. Use of computer software for the static and dynamic analysis of three-dimensional building systems.
Principles and applications of modern hydrology, precipitation, surface-water runoff, and open channel hydraulics. Includes topics in urban hydrology, stormwater controls and pollution controls.
An introduction to modern groundwater hydrology emphasizing quantitative analysis of subsurface flow. Topics include well hydraulics, stream/aquifer interactions, and contaminant transport. Use of modeling tools and techniques is emphasized.
An introduction to the handling and management of solid and hazardous wastes. Emphasis on state-of-the-art engineering techniques and contemporary management issues based on social, economic, and legal considerations; risk assessment; case studies. Special emphasis on problems of developing countries.
Characteristics and manufacture of bituminous materials; engineering properties, design, and production of bituminous mixtures; analysis, design, and construction of flexible and rigid pavement cross-sections; stabilization of sub-grades; analysis of pavement distress; development and operation of pavement management systems; and application of computer software.
Asphalt mix types and their use in flexible pavements. Properties of asphalt and aggregates that determine mix properties. Design of asphalt aggregate mix to meet the structural and environmental requirements. Construction of asphalt mixes, including equipment, procedures, influence on properties, constrains, specification, and quality control. Surface treatment of asphalt pavement. Recycling of previously used materials. Recent developments in asphalt mix technology.
Traffic engineering fundamentals, traffic control signs, markings, and signals. Intersection and highway capacity. Highway safety and accident investigations. Design of streets and parking facilities. Assessment of the environmental impact of traffic.
This course presents selected topics in advanced transportation engineering techniques, design, and analysis. These topics cover the advanced technologies in the areas of transportation pavements, transportation materials, traffic engineering, and travel demand modeling. The course is also designed to equip students with practical design oriented experience with comprehensive knowledge learned through previous transportation related classes.