This non-baccalaureate course employs non-traditional teaching methods and learning strategies that have been specially designed to enhance student success in the course. Introduction to the basic properties of real numbers, variables, equations, algebraic expressions, functions and their graphs. Includes evaluation of expressions and formulas; translation from words to symbols; solutions of linear equations and inequalities; absolute value; powers and roots; solving two linear equations in two unknowns; real world applications.
This non-baccalaureate course employs non-traditional teaching methods and learning strategies that have been specially designed to enhance student success in the course. Review of linear equations, inequalities, exponents, and polynomials, functions, rational expressions, rational exponents, and radicals, quadratic equations, systems of linear equations and logarithms.
Introduction to the basic properties of real numbers, variables, equations, algebraic expressions, functions and their graphs. This includes evaluation of expressions and formulas; translation from words to symbols; solutions of linear equations and inequalities; absolute value; powers and roots; solving two linear equations in two unknowns; real world applications.
Review of linear equations, inequalities, exponents, and polynomials. Functions, rational expressions, rational exponents, and radicals, quadratic equations, systems of linear equations, and logarithms.
An informal approach to mathematics designed to bring an appreciation and workable knowledge of the subject to non-majors.
Summary of numerical data, elementary probability, distributions, and introduction to statistical inference.
A special section of MATH 105 for students in the Honors in General Education Program. Summary of numerical data, elementary probability, distributions, and introduction to statistical inference.
Solutions to systems of linear equations, matrices, linear programming, combinatorics, probability, binomial and normal distributions.
Descriptive statistics, sampling theory, statistical inference and tests of hypotheses, analysis of variance, chi-square tests, simple regression and correlation, and multiple regression and correlation.
This course covers the fundamental concepts and techniques of differential and integral calculus with an introduction to differential equations. Emphasis on applications from the Life Sciences.
Structure of the real number system, operations on real numbers, number theory.
Problem-solving, probability and statistics, measurement and the metric system, geometry.
The Hands-On Lab for Mathematics provides a rich, sustained, and guided teaching experience for undergraduate students preparing to be elementary or middle school teachers. By developing, refining, and repeatedly teaching a lesson aligned to California mathematics standards, prospective teachers gain insights into the complexities of teaching mathematics content. In addition, prospective teachers engage in Lesson Study with the teachers for these children, thus acquiring experience in a collegial relationship with practicing professionals.
Trigonometric functions, graphs, identities and conditional equations, logarithms, solutions of triangles, and complex numbers.
Functions and graphs, including polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions. Systems of equations and inequalities, polar and parametric equations, complex numbers, and analytic trigonometry.
Limits and continuity. The derivative and applications to related rates, maxma and minima, and curve sketching. Transcendental functions. An introduction to the definite integral and area.
The definite integral and applications to area, volume, work, differential equations, etc. Sequences and series, vectors and analytic geometry in 2 and 3-space, polar coordinates, and parametric equations.
The Project M.A.T.H. Seminar - Year 1 is a biweekly seminar for students in their first year of Project M.A.T.H., an innovative program for students interested in becoming secondary mathematics teachers. Students work with mentor teachers, prepare and present lessons, and participate in a structured early field experience. Completion of the seminar series satisfies the Credential Program's Early Field Experience requirement.
A rigorous introduction to discrete mathematical structures for computer science majors (fulfills a requirement for the minor in math). Topics include propositional and predicate calculus; basic proof methods; sets, functions, and operations with them; algorithms and their complexity; applications of number theory to computer science and computer security; matrices and matrix arithmetic; mathematical induction, recursive definitions and algorithms; combinatorics and counting techniques; relations and their representation by matrices and digraphs, applications to databases; equivalence relations and partitions of sets; partially ordered sets, lattices, and Boolean algebras; Boolean functions and circuits; graphs, trees, and their applications; formal languages and grammars; finite-state automata and language recognition, regular languages.
Vector functions and space curves. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, and multiple integrals. Vector calculus line integrals, surface integrals, divergence/curl, Green's Theorem, Divergence Theorem, and Stokes' Theorem.
An introduction to the use of mathematical computer software. This course provides an introduction to a programming environment, preparing math majors to use computers to explore and solve varied math problems. The software used in this class depends on the instructor and may be chosen from Mathematica, GP/PARI, GAP, SAS, R, etc.
Matrices, determinants, cartesian n-space (basis and dimension of a subspace, rank, change of basis), linear transformations, eigenvalues. Numerical problems will be emphasized.
This seminar and the associated CAVE field experience give prospective teachers early exposure to issues relevant to the profession of teaching secondary mathematics. In particular, the experience helps these future teachers develop a deeper understanding of the K-12 mathematics curriculum, understand connections between their university subject matter preparation and K-12 academic content, and reflect on developmental and social factors that affect K-12 students' learning of mathematics.
First order separable, linear, and exact equations; second order linear equations, Laplace transforms, series solutions at an ordinary point, systems of first order linear equations, and applications.
The study of the scientific and strategic principles underlying war and peace in the 21st Century. Concepts from the physical sciences. The strategic theories of Sun Tzu and Clausewitz. Warfare in the 20th Century, especially the development and effects of nuclear weapons. The world after Sept. 11, 2001.
The study of statistical principles. Descriptive statistics, regression analysis, sampling theory, statistical inference for population means and proportions. Economic systems. Ideologies related to economic systems. Quantitative and statistical measures of economic inequality, including the Gini index, Lorenz curve, Income Disparity Index, and the Kuznets curve. Applications to social and economic inequality.
Design of statistical experiments, graphing, sampling techniques, probability, and common probability distributions will be discussed, with an emphasis on practical applications. Uses and misuses of statistics, misrepresentation of data, and proper and improper statistical analyses will be discussed.
An intuitive investigation into mathematics to find recurrent themes. Problem-solving techniques and a search for patterns will be used throughout a discussion of topics such as modular arithmetic, complex numbers, mathematical sequences and their applications.
An intuitive approach to problem-solving in coordinate geometry, motion geometry, and space geometry. Concrete models will be used for analyzing abstract ideas.
Basic concepts of probability and statistics with emphasis on models used in science and technology. Probability models for statistical estimation and hypothesis testing. Confidence limits. One- and two-sample inference, simple regression, one- and two-way analysis of variance.
Single and two sample inference, analysis of variance, mulitple regression, analysis of co-variance, experimental design, repeated measures, nonparametric procedures, and categorical data analysis. Examples are drawn from biology and related disciplines. Statistical packages are introduced. Appropriate for biology, agriculture, nutrition, psychology, social science and other majors.
A survey of elementary principles of logic, emphasizing the nature of proof. Standard methods of proof will be illustrated with examples from various branches of mathematics, including set theory and the theory of functions and relations. Other possible sources of examples include the calculus, number theory, theory of equations, topology of the real line.
Study of the historical development of mathematics, with particular emphasis on the relationship between mathematics and society.
Basic properties of the integers, division algorithm, fundamental theorem of arithmetic, number-theoretic functions, Diophantine equations, congruences, quadratic residues, continued fractions.
This course is designed to supplement the mathematical background of the candidate for the single subject credential in mathematics. The mathematical topics will be discussed from the student's and the teacher's points of view to aid the candidate in making the transition to secondary school mathematics. Topics include mathematical problem-solving, conceptual ideas using algebra, geometry, and functions, incorporating technology into the mathematics curriculum, and finite systems.
This course focuses on having students examine mathematical pedagogy and the understanding and evaluations of students as mathematical learners as it analyzes secondary mathematics curriculum from an advanced standpoint. Students will have opportunities to be involved in the facilitation of mathematical learning. Topics include: history of mathematics education, contemporary mathematics curricula, problem solving, mathematical reasoning and methods of proof, mathematical learning theories, communication, assessment and collaborative learning communities.
The analysis of mathematical and applied problems through the use of permutations and combinations, generating functions and recurrence relations. Directed graphs, trees, connectivity, and duality.
An exploration of axioms and models for Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries focusing on the independence of the Parallel Postulate. Additional topics will be chosen from Euclidean plane geometry, transformation geometry, and the geometry of polyhedra.
